# ORM: Object Relatonal mapping 

ORM stands for `Object-Relational Mapping`, a programming technique used in software development to convert data between incompatible type systems in object-oriented programming languages. This technique creates a "virtual object database" that can be used from within the programming language.

ORMs let you easily interact with your database without worrying too much about the underlying syntax (SQL language for eg)

---

## Why to use ORM's:

### 1. Simpler syntax
converts objects to SQL queries under the hood

### 2. Abstraction that lets you flip the database you are using. Unified API irrespective of the DB

### 3. Type safety/Auto completion

### 4. Automatic migrations

In case of a simple Postgres app, it’s very hard to keep track of all the commands that were ran that led to the current schema of the table.


As your app grows, you will have a lot of these CREATE  and ALTER  commands.
ORMs (or more specifically Prisma) maintains all of these for you.

---

# Introduction to Prisma:

- Prisma is a Node.js specific ORM

### Features:

1. Data model:
 In a single file, define your schema. what it looks like, what tables you have,what field each table has, how are rows related to each other.

2. Automatic migrations: 
    Prisma generates and runs database migrations based on changes to the prisma Schema

    > Note: Data migration defines the migration of data accross Databases which defines what queries to be run in order to get the exact schema. Automatically Keeps tracks of all the migrations that has occured as your application grows.

3. Type safety 
    Prisma generates a type-safe database client based on prisma schema. 

---

# Installation of Prisma

1. initialize empty Node.js project 

```bash
npm init -y
```

2. Add dependencies

```bash
npm install prisma typescript ts-node @types/node --save-dev
```

3. Initialize typescript 

```bash
npx tsc --init 
change 'rootdir'--> 'src'
change 'outdir'--> 'dist'
```

4. Install prisma

```bash
npx prisma init 
```

--- 

## Data Models in Prisma 

Model defines how a table schema is defined,
written in schema.prisma file.

- Example for a todo app 

```prisma

model user {
   
  id Int @id @default(autoincrement())
  email String @unique
  firstname String?
  lastname String?
  password String 

}

model todo {

  id Int @id @default(autoincrement())
  title String
  completed Boolean @default(false)
  description String? 
  userId Int

}

```

---

## Migrations in prisma 

The migrations in prisma can be done using the command:
creates a migration file

```bash
npx prisma migrate dev --name migration_name
```

stored in the migrations folder inside 
---

## Generating a Prisma `Client`

The process of converting the `schema`.prisma into an `autogenerated client ` with all the neccessary classes for implementation is called a client.

prisma autogenerates client based on your `schema.prisma` file.

steps:
- create schema.prisma
- create migrations 
- create client (exports class)